---
layout: post
title: JavaScript Events in Shiny
edited: 2015-09-04
author: Yihui Xie
description: A number of JavaScript events are supported in Shiny as of version 0.13.0. These events can be used to keep track of the app's progress, or even manipulate the values of inputs/outputs.
---

A number of JavaScript events are supported in Shiny as of version 0.13.0. These events can be used to keep track of the app's progress, or even manipulate the values of inputs/outputs. All event names have the prefix `shiny:`, e.g., `shiny:connected`. We can listen to these events using jQuery's `.on()` method, e.g.,

{% highlight javascript %}
$(document).on('shiny:connected', function(event) {
  alert('Connected to the server');
});
{% endhighlight %}

When an event is triggered in Shiny, the `event` object may have some additional properties that can be used to query or modify the information in Shiny, as we will see later in this document. Some events can cancel the process in Shiny, e.g., stop the propagation of an input or output change to the server. Such events include `shiny:inputchanged`, `shiny:message`, `shiny:value`, `shiny:error`, `shiny:updateinput`. To cancel the Shiny process, you can use `event.preventDefault()`, e.g.,

{% highlight javascript %}
// no outputs will be updated since we canceled the output changes
$(document).on('shiny:value', function(event) {
  event.preventDefault();
});
{% endhighlight %}

All events currently supported in Shiny are listed [below](#summary). Here's a [live example](https://gallery.shinyapps.io/107-events) ([source](https://github.com/rstudio/shiny-examples/tree/master/107-events)).

## Initial Connection, Session Initialization and Disconnection

The events `shiny:connected` and `shiny:disconnected` are triggered when an initial connection to server is established, and when a session is ended or the connection is lost for some reason, respectively.

You can think of the `shiny:connected` event as firing the moment that you connect to Shiny. However, if you want to listen for an event that signals when you want to interact with the `session` object, you should use `shiny:sessioninitialized`. This event is only fired after the `session` object (the optional third argument in the Shiny server function) is fully initialized and queryable. These two events should happen almost immediately one after the other.

For `shiny:connected` and `shiny:disconnected`, the event object has a `socket` property, which is used to store the web socket that is used to communicate between R and JavaScript. For example, you may query the state of the web socket via `event.socket.readyState`. The `shiny:sessioninitialized` event doesn't have any special Shiny properties.

## Server Status: Busy/Idle

The event `shiny:busy` is triggered when something is happening on the server (e.g. an observer is running), and the event `shiny:idle` indicates when the server is idle. The event object does not carry any special properties related to Shiny.

By the first time that `shiny:idle` is triggered, both `shiny:connected` and `shiny:sessioninitialized` have already fired (by that order).

## Messages

The `shiny:message` is triggered when any messages are received from the server. The event has a property `message`, which is the message object (a JavaScript object).

## Conditional Panels

When conditional panels (see `?shiny::conditionalPanel`) are updated, the event `shiny:conditional` is triggered on the document.

## Binding/Unbinding Inputs/Outputs

All the events above are triggered on the whole document. There are a few events triggered on specific HTML elements, including the events in the following sections on input and output elements.

When an input or output is bound to Shiny, the event `shiny:bound` is triggered. Similarly, there is a `shiny:unbound` event after an input/output is unbound. In these events, the event object has properties `binding` (the input/output binding object) and `bindingType` (may be `'input'` or `'output'` depending on whether the binding is for an input or an output).

## Output Events

The `shiny:value` event is triggered when an output receives a value from the server. The event object has three properties: `name` (output id), `value` (output value), and `binding` (output binding).

The `shiny:outputinvalidated` event is triggered when an output's value is invalidated on the server. The event object has two properties: `name` (output id), and `binding` (output binding).

The `shiny:error` event is triggered when an error is propagated to an output. The event also has three properties like the `shiny:value` event: `name`, `error` (the error message), and `binding`.

The `shiny:recalculating` and `shiny:recalculated` events are triggered before and after an output value is recalculated, respectively. Please note `shiny:recalculated` is triggered after the output value has been recalculated in R, but that does not imply the output value has been displayed on the page. Use `shiny:value` instead if you want to do something when the output value is rendered.

To recap, suppose you have an output `x` which takes a reactive dependency on `y` (this could be an input or another reactive object). When `y` changes, the first thing that happens is that `x` is invalidated (and the `shiny:outputinvalidated` event for `x` is fired). The `shiny:recalculating` event is the next one to be fired for `x`. This may happen either immediately after the previous event, or it can take a while, depending on whether or not there are other previously invalidated objects also waiting to be recalculated. Once the value of `x` has finished recalculating, its `shiny:recalculated` event is fired. The last event to be fired for `x` is `shiny:value` (or `shiny:error` if the recalculation resulted in an error).

The `shiny:visualchange` event is triggered when an output is resized, hidden, or shown. The event object has properties `visible` (`true` or `false`) and `binding` (the output binding).

Since these events are triggered specifically on an output element, you may add the listener on the output element instead of on the document, although the latter also works, e.g.

{% highlight javascript %}
$('#foo').on('shiny:value', function(event) {
  // append a character string to the output value
  event.value += ' Oh that is nice!';
});

// use event.target to obtain the output element
$(document).on('shiny:value', function(event) {
  // cancel the output of the element with id 'foo'
  if (event.target.id === 'foo') {
    event.preventDefault();
  }
});
{% endhighlight %}

## Input Events

The event `shiny:inputchanged` is triggered when an input possibly has a new value, e.g., when you click an action button, or type in a text input. The event object has properties `name` (the id of the input), `value` (the value of the input), `inputType` (the type of the input, e.g. `shiny.action`), `binding` (the input binding object), and `el` (the DOM element for the input). The reason that it can be triggered when the input *possibly* has a new value is because, in some cases, keyboard or mouse events can trigger `shiny:inputchanged` even when the value has not actually changed.

For example, suppose you have a numeric input with id `foo`, you may double its value through this event:

{% highlight javascript %}
$(document).on('shiny:inputchanged', function(event) {
  if (event.name === 'foo') {
    event.value *= 2;
  }
});
{% endhighlight %}


The `shiny:updateinput` event is triggered when an input is updated from the server, e.g., when you call `updateTextInput()` in R to update the label or value of a text input. The event object has properties `message` (the update message sent from the server) and `binding` (the input binding).

# Summary

Here is a summary of the events. The ones that are cancelable can also be modified by users, e.g., you can change `event.value` in the `shiny:inputchanged` event, and the new `event.value` will be used as the input value (to be passed to R).

{: .table .table-condensed}
| Name                     | Event Properties                    | Cancelable | Target               |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------|----------------------|
| shiny:connected          | socket                              | No         | document             |
| shiny:disconnected       | socket                              | No         | document             |
| shiny:sessioninitialized |                                     | No         | document             |
| shiny:busy               |                                     | No         | document             |
| shiny:idle               |                                     | No         | document             |
| shiny:inputchanged       | name, value, inputType, binding, el | Yes        | input element        |
| shiny:message            | message                             | Yes        | document             |
| shiny:conditional        |                                     | No         | document             |
| shiny:bound              | binding, bindingType                | No         | input/output element |
| shiny:unbound            | binding, bindingType                | No         | input/output element |
| shiny:value              | name, value, binding                | Yes        | output element       |
| shiny:error              | name, error, binding                | Yes        | output element       |
| shiny:outputinvalidated  | name, binding                       | No         | output element       |
| shiny:recalculating      |                                     | No         | output element       |
| shiny:recalculated       |                                     | No         | output element       |
| shiny:visualchange       | visible, binding                    | No         | output element       |
| shiny:updateinput        | message, binding                    | Yes        | input element        |
| shiny:filedownload       | name, href                          | No         | download button/link |
