---
layout: post
title: Improving scalability with async programming
author: Joe Cheng
edited: 2019-10-15
description: Asynchronous programming is a powerful but advanced technique for increasing the scalability of your Shiny apps. On its own, async programming doesn't increase the performance or responsiveness for a single user of your app, but can improve responsiveness (dramatically, in some cases) when multiple users are active at the same time.
---

Asynchronous programming is a powerful but advanced technique for increasing the scalability of your Shiny apps (starting with the Shiny 1.1.0 release). On its own, async programming _doesn't_ increase the performance or responsiveness for a single user of your app, but can improve responsiveness--dramatically, in some cases--when multiple users are active at the same time.

Async programming is mainly effective when your app has one, or two, or a few spots where a lot of time is spent. This might be where you download a large amount of data from a web API, or run a slow query against a remote database, or ferret through a directory full of thousands of log files. You can use async to offload this kind of work to a background R process, leaving Shiny free to service other users while it waits for those calculations to complete.

Shiny integrates with the [**promises**](https://rstudio.github.io/promises/) package, which you'll need to become intimately familiar with if you want to take advantage of async programming.

## Optimize first!

If your app doesn't scale well and you don't yet know why, _stop and figure that out first!_ Async programming should be your last resort in fixing performance and scalability problems. If you haven't tried [profiling](profiling.html) and removing common [bottlenecks](performance.html), definitely do that first, and only turn to async programming if you're sure the long-running tasks you're trying to offload are already run as quickly and as seldom as possible.

## Watch the talk

For a quick introduction to async programming with Shiny, check out this video introducing the feature at rstudio::conf 2018:

[<i class="fas fa-play-circle fa-lg" aria-hidden="true"></i> Scaling Shiny apps with async programming](https://resources.rstudio.com/rstudio-conf-2018/scaling-shiny-apps-with-async-programming-joe-cheng)


## Get started

If you're ready to get started learning about async programming in earnest, you'll find all the documentation you need at the [promises site](https://rstudio.github.io/promises/). Async programming is an advanced technique, so we highly recommend you read through the entire six-part article series there!
